While most of the world's attention is
currently fixated on the part of the war
in the Middle East taking place across
Iran and the Strait of Hormuz, there's a
separate, potentially even more
consequential theater of operations in
the long term that's also taking place
in Lebanon that could end up resulting
in a permanent change in borders. Two
days after the US and Israel started the
war in Iran by killing Iran's former
supreme leader in a missile strike,
Hezbollah, a heavily armed paramilitary
and political party in Lebanon that is
strongly supported by Iran with arms and
cash, decided to retaliate by firing
rockets and drones into northern Israel
again for the first time since they'd
agreed to a ceasefire with Israel after
the last war between them ended in late
2024.
And since then, full-scale war between
Israel and Hezbollah has returned back
to Lebanon once again. And this time,
it'll likely have much worse
consequences than even any prior
fighting between them did. Israel has
since conducted hundreds of heavy air
strikes all across Lebanon in a campaign
they have said is targeting Hezbollah.
While Hezbollah has fired more than a
thousand rockets and drones into
northern Israel at the same time. In the
middle of March, the Israeli ground
forces launched a renewed invasion
across the border into southern Lebanon
with a stated goal of pushing Hezbollah
away from their border once and for all.
>> [music]
>> And then, most escalatory of all,
Israel's defense minister stated plainly
on the final day of March that Israel's
current military objective is to seize
control over all of the territory in
southern Lebanon up to the Litani River,
some 30 km or 19 mi deep into Lebanon
away from the Israeli border, which is
all a chunk of land that represents
roughly 10% of Lebanon's entire
sovereign territory. Shortly before this
announcement, the Israeli military also
ordered the entire Lebanese population
that lives within this territory and
beyond up to the Zahrani River to
evacuate further northwards with
additional evacuation orders given for
the Shiite majority southern suburbs of
the capital Beirut.
>> [music]
>> Some 600,000
Lebanese people have since been reported
to have fled their homes in the south
from below the Litani River and another
400,000 more from between the Litani and
the Zahrani rivers and from the southern
suburbs of Beirut. The overwhelming
majority of whom are members of
Lebanon's Shiite community and which
collectively represents the largest
forced displacement of people in
Lebanon's entire modern history that is
affecting roughly one in six people in
the whole country. The Israeli defense
minister has since openly stated that
after his country finishes its
occupation of southern Lebanon beneath
the Litani River, Israel will continue
occupying it as a so-called buffer zone
even after the current war with
Hezbollah and Iran concludes until an
undetermined point in the future when
Israel feels confident that the threat
posed by Hezbollah to northern Israel is
ended for good. With no clear timeline
established for how long that could
potentially be, it has led to fears
within Lebanon that the Israelis are
moving towards an indefinite, open-ended
occupation of the south of their country
again like they did for nearly two
decades between 1982 and 2000 or even
worse towards a full-on permanent
annexation of all of the land instead.
Fears that are not being assuaged by the
ongoing rhetoric and actions taking
place within the halls of the highest
authorities in Israel.
The Israeli defense minister has
explicitly stated that absolutely none
of the some 600,000
Lebanese residents who have fled from
the area south of the Litani River will
be allowed to return home again until
the open-ended mission of ensuring the
security of northern Israel is
accomplished. Meaning in other words,
that there is no clear timeline for when
or even if they will be allowed to
return again. The defense minister has
also added that in order to root out
Hezbollah from the border area once and
for all, the Israeli military will have
to conduct operations based on the model
they pursued in Rafah and Beit Hanoun in
Gaza. Meaning that they're going to
completely demolish and raze all of the
Lebanese villages that border Israel
down to the ground. Israel might
consider this militarily important in
order to remove any structure along the
border that Hezbollah could use to
fortify or store rockets said. But to
most everyone in Lebanon right now, it
also looks like Israel is laying the
groundwork to eventually annex this
territory beneath the Litani River. And
those fears haven't been helped by the
comments of Israel's Finance Minister
Bezalel Smotrich, either.
Just a week before the defense minister
said that Israel was going to occupy all
of the territory beneath the Litani for
an indefinite amount of time, Smotrich
said plainly during an interview on the
radio that the new Israeli border needed
to be expanded up to the Litani River in
the war's aftermath. Effectively arguing
that the same area of Lebanon currently
being invaded and occupied in the name
of rooting out Hezbollah should be
formally annexed and incorporated
directly into Israel, the same way that
the Golan Heights were previously from
Syria. Indeed, after repeatedly having
come under attack from the Golan Heights
by the Syrian army, Israel eventually
counterattacked and occupied the
territory under similar arguments about
transforming it into a temporary buffer
zone in 1967 to defend the homeland.
Only to then allow Israeli settlers to
begin moving in later that led to Israel
formally annexing the buffer zone 14
years later in 1981.
And now, many in Lebanon fear that the
precedent set by the Golan Heights is
being applied to the south of their
country next in real time. Officials at
the UN have even warned in recent weeks
that the world should be preparing
itself for an imminent new addition to
the list of Israeli occupied territories
in the Middle East. And in order to
understand how we even got here and what
it means for the future, let's just
rewind back a few years ago in order to
gain some context. [music]
Even before the start of this current
war, Lebanon as a country was teetering
on the brink of collapse and had been
devastated by years of compounding
crises and wars with Israel. Going back
to 2019, Lebanon suffered one of modern
history's most severe financial crises
when an unprecedented banking crisis
contributed to a catastrophic 90%
collapse of the country's currency
value, which wiped out the majority of
savings for millions of Lebanese
residents. The financial crisis led to
Lebanon defaulting on its sovereign debt
for the first time in its history in
2020, and led to the country's GDP
collapsing by more than 40% in one of
the top three worst financial implosions
that any society has seen since the 19th
century. And then, just months after
that, a massive explosion rocked the
port in Beirut, the country's capital
city, which killed more than 200 people
and according to the World Bank caused
more than $8 billion in financial
damages, equivalent to nearly a third of
Lebanon's entire remaining GDP by that
point, that triggered a firestorm of
criticism against the government on
accusations of corruption and
mismanagement.
And then, just a few years later in
2023, in this environment of an already
deep crisis for the country, Hamas
launched its October 7th attack on
Israel from Gaza, which led to Hezbollah
deciding almost immediately join the war
in support of Hamas by firing rockets
across the border into northern Israel,
which in effect dragged the entire rest
of the country of Lebanon into the war
as well, whether they wanted to or not.
Hezbollah is a powerful militia,
paramilitary, and political party within
Lebanon that has long functioned as
essentially a state within the state.
Hezbollah's base of support
overwhelmingly comes from Lebanon's
Shiite Muslim population, who represent
roughly 27% of the country's total
population and who make up regional
majorities in South Lebanon immediately
across the border from Israel, as well
as in the fertile Bekaa Valley that
makes up Lebanon's most valuable
farmland, and in the southern suburbs of
Beirut. Hezbollah was originally formed
as a Shiite resistance militia back in
1982 after Israel invaded Lebanon for
the first time in response to attacks
that were then coming from southern
Lebanon by Palestinian militants, and
after they came to occupy a swath of
southern Lebanon as a so-called buffer
zone. Hezbollah and the Lebanese Shiite
community more broadly, each came to see
this Israeli occupation in the south as
an occupation of historically Shiite
lands, and fought bitterly over the next
18 years to push the Israelis out. While
they began receiving heavy financial and
military support from their natural
ally, Iran, as well.
Israel eventually withdrew from the
occupation zone in South Lebanon in
2000, but Hezbollah was able to maintain
its position within Lebanon as a heavily
armed Iranian proxy force beyond the
reach of the central government. And
then, they entered into another war with
Israel in 2006.
That war only lasted for about a month
before a ceasefire went into effect,
including the now infamous UN Resolution
1701, which called for Hezbollah to
fully withdraw away from the Israeli
border to the north of the Litani River,
and for the eventual disarmament of
Hezbollah as an organization, with the
implication that it was up to the
Lebanese government to actually enforce
it. But for two decades since then, the
Lebanese government has either never
enforced it or only half-heartedly
enforced it. Not necessarily out of a
lack of will, but out of a deep fear of
what trying to do so would actually
mean. You have to understand that
Lebanon doesn't really work the same way
that a normal country does. Lebanon is
an immensely diverse country in terms of
religious beliefs, where roughly 55% of
the country are Muslims, evenly divided
between Sunnis and Shiites. Another
40.5% of the population are Christians,
divided between a variety of different
sects, while another 4.5% are Druze.
Lebanon suffered a devastating sectarian
civil war between all of these groups
for nearly 15 years between 1975 and
1990, that killed more than 100,000
people, and ended with the country
establishing a delicate balance of power
between all of its many religious groups
to try and put as much of a lid on the
internal tensions going forward as
possible. Under this convoluted system,
the country's president must always be a
Maronite Catholic Christian, the prime
minister always a Sunni Muslim, the
Speaker of Parliament, always a Shiite
Muslim, the Deputy Speaker of the
Parliament, always a Greek Orthodox
Christian, the Deputy Prime Minister,
also always a Greek Orthodox Christian,
and the Army Chief of Staff, always a
Druze. The country's Parliament is
similarly divided along strict sectarian
lines, with 50% of all the seats
reserved for the Muslims and Druze, and
the other 50% reserved for the
Christians. They are all further
strictly subdivided by sect. The
Lebanese government's long fear, and
actually ever forcing Hezbollah to
disarm itself and withdrawing north of
the Litani River, is that it would
trigger Hezbollah and the Shiite
community more broadly in the country to
each revolt and re-trigger the civil war
of the 1970s and '80s again.
Even worse, the Lebanese government has
never been sure or even optimistic that
they would actually win a fight [music]
against Hezbollah, because Hezbollah is,
by most metrics, even more powerful than
the Lebanese Armed Forces themselves
are. Hezbollah wields an annual budget
of around $1 billion, $700 700 to 800
million dollars of which are directly
provided by the Iranian government,
which is even larger than the budget
afforded to the Lebanese Armed Forces,
which only amounts to $635 million
dollars a year as of 2024. $230 million
dollars of which is also provided by the
United States. Hezbollah has been able
to maintain a standing army that's
nearly the same size as the Lebanese
Armed Forces, [music] and their fighters
are even better paid, better equipped,
better trained, have greater real-world
combat experience, and undoubtedly
have higher morale and motivation and
unit cohesion than the Lebanese Armed
Forces have. Since Hezbollah's fighters
are almost entirely Shiites, while the
Lebanese Armed Forces are similarly
divided along sectarian lines, just like
the government is. This is why it has
always been viewed as extremely
difficult for the Lebanese government to
ever actually rein Hezbollah in. And
now, Hezbollah has been able to maintain
a completely separate foreign policy
from the rest of the government. By By
time of Hamas's October 7th, 2023 attack
on Israel, the ceasefire between
Hezbollah and Israel from the 2006 war
was still holding. But, Hezbollah had
also never withdrawn to the north of the
Litani River, nor had ever disarmed.
But, the government had never made any
serious attempt to actually force them
to do so. And then, Hezbollah decided to
attack Israel again and drag the rest of
Lebanon into a war with them during an
unprecedented time of crisis that they
could hardly afford.
This then triggered a 13-month long war
between and Israel that brought enormous
devastation upon Lebanon and Hezbollah
alike. That included the killing of
Hezbollah's long-time leader, Hassan
Nasrallah, and a pager attack that
simultaneously [music]
blew up thousands of
Hezbollah-affiliated pagers that wounded
thousands of Hezbollah's officers and
fighters and civilians. By the end of it
in November of 2024, when the two sides
finally agreed on another ceasefire, up
to 5,000 of Hezbollah's fighters have
been killed, 13,000 more had been
wounded, and $11 billion worth of
estimated damages had been inflicted all
across Lebanon by the relentless Israeli
aerial attacks and bombardments. Israel
also conducted a more limited ground
invasion of southern Lebanon this time
that concluded with them largely
withdrawing after the November 2024
ceasefire, save for five small strategic
high points immediately across the
border that they still maintained their
control over. Additionally, under the
terms of this latest November 2024
ceasefire, Hezbollah was once again
supposed to disarm itself and withdraw
away back to the north of the Litani
River under the supervision of the
Lebanese government and army. While
Israel was supposed to halt all of their
attacks. Neither of them ultimately
upheld their end of the agreement,
however.
Even though Hezbollah had been badly
weakened and bloodied by the war with
Israel, the Lebanese government was
still afraid of the same problem it had
always faced with actually confronting
them. The risk that doing so would
trigger a revolt among the Shiites in
the country and lead to a restarting of
the civil war again. The will was there
with many of the Christians, Sunnis, and
Druze in Lebanon being furious with
Hezbollah over them dragging the rest of
the country into a devastating and
expensive war with Israel against their
wishes. [music]
But as usual, the actual capability of a
weak and fragmented central state to
confront Hezbollah was still absent.
Nonetheless, some progress by the
government on Hezbollah was finally
being made.
In February of 2025, a new government
came into office in Lebanon headed by
President Joseph Aoun and Prime Minister
Nawaf Salam that promised to finally
implement UN Resolution 1701 after
nearly two decades. In August, this new
government for the first time declared
that the Lebanese state had the
exclusive right to full control over all
weapons within its territory,
effectively declaring that Hezbollah's
separate arsenal was illegal. And then
the following month in September, the
government ordered the Lebanese Armed
Forces to create a plan to actually
implement this policy. The new
government also put substantial efforts
into eliminating the flow of weapons and
cash to Hezbollah coming in from abroad
and was beginning to even clamp down on
Hezbollah's presence south of the Litani
River. But it was still never capable of
actually fully confronting Hezbollah.
While Israel maintained almost daily air
strikes against Hezbollah all throughout
the whole ceasefire anyway. Between
November of 2024 when the last ceasefire
began and March of 2026 when it ended,
continued Israeli air strikes in Lebanon
still killed around 350 Hezbollah
fighters and 127 Lebanese civilians. The
Israeli government was accusing the
Lebanese government of not actually
doing enough to clamp down on Hezbollah
like they had agreed to. While the
Lebanese government was accusing the
Israelis of not making it any easier for
them by giving Hezbollah repeated
reasons for continuing to resist by
bombing them and by maintaining their
small five occupying outposts within the
country.
And then, after all of this continued
simmering violence after the Israelis
and Americans began attacking Iran,
Hezbollah decided to begin firing
rockets and drones into northern Israel
again in early March of 2026,
which Israel was then able to use as a
pretext to completely kill the ceasefire
altogether. And as a piece of evidence
that the Lebanese government actually
was making some progress against
Hezbollah, most of the rockets and
drones that Hezbollah fired into Israel
at this time came from north of the
Litani River, rather than from the south
of it. Nonetheless, Israel began
dramatically ramping up its airstrikes
again and initiated a full-scale ground
invasion into southern Lebanon under the
argument that the Lebanese government
was supposedly still doing nothing to
stop Hezbollah, and that the threat of
Hezbollah on Israel's northern border
had to be permanently removed once and
for all after more than 20 years of
consistently refusing to withdraw or
disarm.
Now, multiple things are happening in
Lebanon during this current struggle
between Hezbollah, the Lebanese
government, and Israel. Hezbollah's now
openly refused to consider disarming
itself and has actively portraying its
current war against Israel as an
existential fight for the survival of
the Shiite community within Lebanon, a
narrative that's being reinforced by
Israel's evacuation orders from the
Shiite majority areas and threats that
Shiites will not be allowed to return
back to their ancestral homes south of
the Litani River. Hezbollah's new
leadership have plainly stated that
while they know they cannot stop the
Israelis from taking over southern
Lebanon up to the Litani River, they're
still going to fight against them anyway
and make it as difficult as possible.
And Israel's ground invasion, its
bombing of Shiite majority areas all
across the country, and its rhetoric
about taking over the south of Lebanon
is also fueling Hezbollah's entire
purpose for existing in the first place
at a time when many in Lebanon were
questioning and even doubting that.
The Lebanese government, meanwhile, is
now facing a mounting humanitarian
crisis from the resumption of the war
that is only adding on to the pile of
crises that has already been constantly
experiencing since 2019. More than 1,300
people have already been killed in
Lebanon since the war resumed again.
While Israel's targeted evacuation
orders and bombardments of Shiite
majority areas have triggered the
displacements of more than a million
people, the overwhelming majority of
whom are Lebanese Shiites. And this, in
particular, is greatly exacerbating the
delicate underlying sectarian balance
and fault lines within the country.
Israel has repeatedly conducted aerial
assassination strikes against Hezbollah
and Iranian IRGC members in the country
within civilian areas like apartment
buildings and hotels, which have caused
considerable collateral damage to
Lebanese civilians and have fueled a
deepening sense of paranoia among
Lebanon's Christian and Sunni
communities towards the Shiites
collectively. With more than a million
Shiites fleeing their homes and seeking
refuge elsewhere in the country,
distrustful and paranoid Christian,
Sunni, and Druze Lebanese are resorting
to either vetting them or refusing them
shelter outright out of a fear of
putting a target on their own backs to
the Israelis if they let in Hezbollah
members. And if hundreds of thousands of
Shiite Lebanese are permanently
disallowed from returning back to their
homes again, it will inevitably
significantly change the delicate
demographic balance across Lebanon's
Christian, Sunni, and Druze majority
areas instead, which greatly risks
stoking sectarian tensions and sparking
internal conflict.
The Lebanese government has done their
best to try and diffuse the war and the
crisis, but it's also largely out of
their own hands [music] now. The same
day that Hezbollah began firing rockets
and drones into Israel again on the 2nd
of March, the Lebanese government, for
the first time, declared an explicit ban
on Hezbollah's military activities in
the country, expelled all of the members
of Iran's IRGC from the country, ended
all of their visa-free agreements with
Iran, and even withdrew their ambassador
from Iran. They have also called for
direct negotiations with Israel to end
the war, something that the Lebanese
government has consistently refused to
do for decades now. In response, and for
declining to respond against the Israeli
invasion directly, Hezbollah's
leadership have openly accused the
Lebanese government of committing
treason. And the government is stuck
between a rock and a hard place. If it
pushes too hard back against Israel's
invasion, it looks like they are siding
with Hezbollah, and the vastly more
powerful Israeli military will turn
their guns on them, too. And they'll
also risk losing more than a third of
their military budget that comes from
Israel's top ally, the United States.
And if they push back too hard against
Hezbollah, the Shiite population in the
country will increasingly perceive them
to be traitors, and it risks pushing the
whole country into a civil war. Thus,
the best option for the Lebanese
government has basically been what it's
already been for decades now. Just do
nothing at all.
Meanwhile, and perhaps most importantly,
Israel's ultimate objectives and
intentions in Lebanon right now are
still mysterious. The Israeli military's
officials have insisted [music]
that their objectives are limited to
ensuring that Hezbollah is removed from
the land south of the Litani River for
good, and that the establishment of a
temporary Israeli-controlled buffer zone
between the Litani River and the Israeli
border is necessary in order to ensure
this. But at the same time, as discussed
at the beginning of this video, a lot of
Israel's actions and rhetoric suggest
that it is actually planning something
much more ambitious and escalatory. If
Israel had been strictly interested in
just weakening Hezbollah further, they
could have cooperated with the Lebanese
government that was actually finally
making some progress on reining them in.
They could have helped to strengthen and
solidify the Lebanese central government
and army against Hezbollah. But they
didn't and decided to act against
Hezbollah unilaterally, and invaded
Lebanon instead.
Israel's policy of ordering the
evacuations of hundreds of thousands of
mostly Shiite residents from the south
and its declared policy of bulldozing
towns and villages along the border that
will prevent many of them from being
able to return and its recent call up of
more than 450,000
Israeli reservists suggests that it is
truly planning for a long-term, if not
indefinite, occupation of South Lebanon
beneath the Litani River. While members
of Netanyahu's own cabinet, like Bezalel
Smotrich, are already openly calling for
Israel to annex the whole territory
after they complete their conquest.
While Netanyahu's energy minister, Eli
Cohen, has similarly begun calling to
scrap the landmark maritime deal between
Israel and Lebanon that was sorted out
in 2022 that had resolved the two
countries' long-standing maritime
boundary dispute, which now seemingly
could be back in jeopardy again. Worse
still, the Trump-appointed US ambassador
to Lebanon has made statements that the
Trump administration has reportedly
requested Israel to spare the fates of
Lebanese Christian villages and towns in
the south, but has said nothing about
the Lebanese Shiite villages and towns,
implying that the US government is
actively encouraging a policy of ethnic
cleansing of the Shiites from southern
Lebanon that is being pursued by Israel.
A policy that will inevitably lead to a
stoking of internal tensions within
Lebanon's delicate sectarian balance,
something that Israel itself almost
certainly wants in order to ensure that
Lebanon cannot mount a collective
unified response against them.
To further isolate South Lebanon from
the rest of the country, the Israelis
also bombed and destroyed every single
major bridge that crosses over the
Litani River since the newest war began.
The Israelis have stated that they did
this in order to prevent Hezbollah from
easily being able to move weapons and
fighters to the front lines, but it has
also effectively left South Lebanon
logistically isolated from the rest of
the country, too, which will make
Israel's potential long-term control
over it significantly more easy to
manage. It'll be much more difficult for
the hundreds of thousands of Lebanese
residents who have fled from South
Lebanon to ever return without any
usable bridges over the Litani River
they can actually cross, and without
posts set up over on the other side of
it, set up by the Israeli military.
Well, it's also effectively made it
impossible for humanitarian aid to reach
South Lebanon now as well. The mostly
Shiite refugees who've been evacuated
and forcefully displaced from the South
now fear the echoes of history, and that
their fate right now might end up
becoming the same as what just happened
to the Gazans, or what happened to
hundreds of thousands of Palestinians
who were also forced from their homes
and never allowed to return again after
the 1948 and 1967 wars.
Israel has stated that their war in
Lebanon is separate from the war in
Iran, and therefore that any potential
settlement and end of the war with Iran
will not mean an end of the separate war
in Lebanon. So, the way that I see it,
after the Israelis finalize their
occupation of South Lebanon beneath the
Litani River, three possible scenarios
are likely going forward. First, is that
Israel eventually decides to withdraw
after suffering too many casualties and
too much pressure from Hezbollah in the
international community, which I don't
think is very likely. Second, Israel
might eventually use its control of
South Lebanon as a bargaining chip with
the Lebanese government, offering to
trade it back to Lebanon in return for
Lebanon extending its formal recognition
of Israel and firmly agree to rein in
Hezbollah. Based on a similar deal the
Israelis made with Egypt in the 1980s
when they returned the occupied Sinai
Peninsula back to them in exchange for
Egyptian recognition. And thirdly,
Israel might maintain an indefinite
occupation of South Lebanon, believing
that its value as a militarily
controlled buffer zone separating
northern Israel from Hezbollah is too
important to ever give up, which might
eventually lead to them allowing Israeli
settlers into the territory in order to
establish a firmer demographic control
over it, and an eventual full-on
annexation of the land like they did
with the Golan Heights that they occupy
from Syria. And whatever ends up
happening, Lebanon itself continues
being pushed ever closer to the brink of
complete collapse, which if it happens
will be a calamity for the entire world
to have to deal with.
Meanwhile, in the United States, one of
the most concerning things about living
here is that there are pretty weak data
privacy laws and a ton of personal data
that gets put out into the public
record, frequently by local, state, and
federal governments themselves. It's
always been like that here and it wasn't
ever a huge problem before the advent of
the internet. But these days it means
that people are able to turn a profit
off of making it easier for other people
to get your personal information and
they do. They're called people sites and
if you want to see for yourself, just
search your name and address or phone
numbers and you'll probably come across
a bunch of these sites that list at
least some of your personal information.
But you also have the power to change
this. You have the legal right to
request that your personal data is
removed from each and every one of these
sites. The biggest problem is that it
takes forever to actually do that. They
make it as hard as possible and you have
to do it individually over and over
again for every single one of the
endless sites that have it. But that's a
problem that this video's sponsor
Incogni fixes. They'll do this entire
process for you on your behalf. They
constantly search through the internet
for any of your personal data that's out
there and they'll go through the whole
process of taking it all down including
handling any and all rejections. Letting
Incogni handle all of this for you is
not only great for peace of mind, but it
can also really help cut down on
obnoxious spam calls and emails since
it's these very same services that sell
all of your data in bulk. I've been an
actual customer of Incogni for years
now, so I know that it really works and
I found the cost to be very well worth
it. And it'll be even more worth it for
you because Incogni is offering you 60%
off of their annual plan when you click
the button here on your screen right now
or when you go to
incogni.com/reallifelore
or when you follow the link that's down
below in the description. And when you
use code RealLifeLore. It's a great way
to help support my channel and the
journalism that I'm trying to do here as
well. And as always, thank you so much
for watching.